OSDOCS-17770 created assembly and modules for service mesh single-cluster (#109990)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/zero-trust-manager-deploy-spire.adoc

  clusterName: $CLUSTER_NAME
  caSubject:
    commonName: $APP_DOMAIN
    country: "US"
    organization: "RH"
  persistence:
    type: pvc
    size: "2Gi"
    accessMode: ReadWriteOncePod
  datastore:
    databaseType: sqlite3
    connectionString: "/run/spire/data/datastore.sqlite3"
    maxOpenConns: 100
    maxIdleConns: 2
    connMaxLifetime: 3600
  jwtIssuer: https://$JWT_ISSUER_ENDPOINT
---
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireAgent
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  trustDomain: $APP_DOMAIN
  clusterName: $CLUSTER_NAME
  nodeAttestor:
    k8sPSATEnabled: "true"
  workloadAttestors:
    k8sEnabled: "true"
    workloadAttestorsVerification:
      type: "auto"
---
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpiffeCSIDriver
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec: {}
---
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  trustDomain: $APP_DOMAIN
  jwtIssuer: https://$JWT_ISSUER_ENDPOINT
EOF
----

. Wait for all of the resources to become ready by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout status statefulset/spire-server -n ${ZTWIM_NS} --timeout=2m
----
+
[source,terminal]

> ----

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider has non-existent `trustDomain` field**

`trustDomain` does NOT exist on `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProviderSpec`. The actual spec fields are: `logLevel`, `logFormat`, `csiDriverName`, `jwtIssuer` (Required), `replicaCount`, `managedRoute`, `externalSecretRef`.

Only `jwtIssuer` is needed here. `trustDomain` will be silently pruned by Kubernetes — it has no effect.

This is the same class of issue I flagged earlier on SpireServer and SpireAgent CRs.

Ref: [SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/spire_oidc_discovery_provider_types.go#L26)

Author: Fixed based on above

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * security/zero_trust_workload_identity_manager/zero-trust-manager-mesh-integration.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="zero-trust-manager-deploy-spire_{context}"]
= Deploying SPIRE for {SMProductName} integration

[role="_abstract"]
Deploy SPIRE by using {zero-trust-full} by creating custom resources (CRs) for the SPIRE Server, Agent, CSI Driver, and OIDC Discovery Provider to enable workload identities in {SMProductName}.

.Procedure

. Create the `ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager
metadata:
  name: ztwim-instance
  namespace: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager

> spec:

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: Multiple issues with this CR example**

1. **`name: ztwim-instance` will be rejected by the API server.** All ZTWIM CRDs are singletons. The operator code enforces:
```
+kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.metadata.name == 'cluster'",
message="ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager is a singleton, .metadata.name must be 'cluster'"
```
Must be `name: cluster`.

2. **`namespace:` should be removed.** This CRD is cluster-scoped (`+kubebuilder:resource:scope=Cluster`). Cluster-scoped resources don't have a namespace.

3. **`spec` is empty but has required fields.** `ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManagerSpec` requires `trustDomain` (Required, immutable) and `clusterName` (Required, immutable). The OSSM source doc correctly shows:
```yaml
spec:
  trustDomain: ${TRUST_DOMAIN}
  clusterName: "sky-computing-cluster"
  bundleConfigMap: "spire-bundle"
```

Ref: [ZTWIM types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/zero_trust_workload_identity_manager_types.go#L29) | [OSSM doc](https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/blob/main/docs/ossm/integrations/spire/spire.adoc)

Author: Updated based on doc above

  # ZTWIM configuration
----

. Create the `SpireServer` CR with the JWT issuer URL:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireServer
metadata:
  name: spire-server
  namespace: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager

> spec:

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: Multiple issues with SpireServer CR**

1. **`name: spire-server` must be `name: cluster`** — same singleton constraint as above.
2. **`namespace:` should be removed** — cluster-scoped resource.
3. **`trustDomain` is NOT a field on SpireServerSpec.** It belongs on `ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManagerSpec`. SpireServer spec fields are: `logLevel`, `logFormat`, `jwtIssuer`, `caValidity`, `defaultX509Validity`, `defaultJWTValidity`, `caKeyType`, `caSubject`, `persistence`, `datastore`, `federation`.

The OSSM source doc shows a much more complete SpireServer CR with the correct fields.

Ref: [SpireServer types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/spire_server_config_types.go#L13)

Author: Updated based on doc

  jwtIssuer: https://oidc-discovery.apps.<cluster-domain>
  trustDomain: example.org
----
+
where

'metadata.spec.jwtIssuer':: Specifies your {product-title} cluster's ingress domain. The URL must use the `https://` prefix.
'metadata.spec.trustDomain':: Specifies the SPIFFE trust domain.

. Create the `SpireAgent` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1

> kind: SpireAgent

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: SpireAgent CR has non-existent fields**

1. **`name: spire-agent` must be `name: cluster`** — singleton constraint.
2. **`namespace:` should be removed** — cluster-scoped.
3. **`serverAddress` and `trustDomain` do NOT exist on `SpireAgentSpec`.** The actual spec fields are: `socketPath` (default: `/run/spire/agent-sockets`), `logLevel`, `logFormat`, `nodeAttestor`, `workloadAttestors`.

Ref: [SpireAgent types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/spire_agent_config_types.go#L12)

Author: done

metadata:
  name: spire-agent
  namespace: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  serverAddress: spire-server.zero-trust-workload-identity-manager.svc.cluster.local
  trustDomain: example.org
----

. Create the `SpiffeCSIDriver` CR:
+
[source,yaml]

> ----

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: SpiffeCSIDriver CR issues**

1. **`name: spiffe-csi-driver` must be `name: cluster`** — singleton.
2. **`namespace:` should be removed** — cluster-scoped.
3. **`agentSocketPath` value is wrong.** The field description says it is "the path to the **directory** containing the SPIRE agent's Workload API socket", not the socket file itself. Default is `/run/spire/agent-sockets` (a directory). The OSSM source doc correctly uses `agentSocketPath: '/run/spire/agent-sockets'`.

Ref: [SpiffeCSIDriver types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/spiffe_csi_config_types.go#L12)

Author: Done

apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpiffeCSIDriver
metadata:
  name: spiffe-csi-driver
  namespace: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  agentSocketPath: /run/spire/agent-sockets/spire-agent.sock
----

. Create the `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` CR:

> +

Reviewer: **CRITICAL: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider CR has non-existent field**

1. **`name: oidc-discovery` must be `name: cluster`** — singleton.
2. **`namespace:` should be removed** — cluster-scoped.
3. **`serverAddress` does NOT exist on `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProviderSpec`.** The actual fields are: `logLevel`, `logFormat`, `csiDriverName`, `jwtIssuer` (Required), `replicaCount`, `managedRoute`, `externalSecretRef`.

Ref: [SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider types](https://github.com/openshift/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/spire_oidc_discovery_provider_types.go#L12)

Author: Done

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider
metadata:
  name: oidc-discovery
  namespace: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  serverAddress: spire-server.zero-trust-workload-identity-manager.svc.cluster.local
----

. Enable create-only mode on {zero-trust-full} to prevent overwriting manual ConfigMap changes during reconciliation:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n $OPERATOR_NAMESPACE patch subscription openshift-zero-trust-workload-identity-manager \
    --type='merge' \
    -p '{"spec":{"config":{"env":[{"name":"CREATE_ONLY_MODE","value":"true"}]}}}'
----
+
where

> `$OPERATOR_NAMESPACE`:: Specifies the namespace where you installed {zero-trust-full} from OperatorHub.

Reviewer: **MAJOR: ConfigMap patch section should be removed — GA 1.1.0 already includes SDS config natively**

The `CREATE_ONLY` mode ConfigMap patching step documented here is no longer necessary. The ZTWIM operator GA 1.1.0 (`pkg/controller/spire-agent/configmap.go`) now hardcodes the required SDS configuration (`default_svid_name`, `default_bundle_name`, `default_all_bundles_name: "ROOTCA"`) natively when reconciling the spire-agent ConfigMap.

This entire section instructing users to patch `/data/agent.conf` should be removed to avoid:
1. **Overwriting operator-managed config** — the `"op": "add"` replaces the full key, not just the SDS block
2. **Confusing users** with a manual step that the operator already handles
3. **Potential drift** if users apply the patch and the operator later reconciles it back

**Recommendation**: Remove the ConfigMap patching procedure entirely. If documenting for older pre-GA versions is needed, gate it behind a version prerequisite note.

Author: Done

apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager
metadata:
 name: cluster
 labels:
   app.kubernetes.io/name: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
   app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  trustDomain: ${TRUST_DOMAIN}
  clusterName: ""
  bundleConfigMap: "spire-bundle"
EOF
----

.. Create the `SpireServer` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireServer
metadata:
 name: cluster
spec:
  logLevel: "info"
  logFormat: "text"
  jwtIssuer: $JWT_ISSUER
  caValidity: "24h"
  defaultX509Validity: "1h"
  defaultJWTValidity: "5m"
  caKeytype: “rsa-2048”
  jwtKeyType: "rsa-2048"
  keyManager: “”
  caSubject:
    country: "US"
    organization: "RH"
    commonName: "SPIRE Server CA"
  persistence:
    size: "5Gi"
    accessMode: "ReadWriteOnce"
  datastore:
    databaseType: "sqlite3"
    connectionString: "/run/spire/data/datastore.sqlite3"
    tlsSecretName: ""
    maxOpenConns: 100
    maxIdleConns: 10
    connMaxLifetime: 0
    disableMigration: "false"
EOF
----

.. Wait for the SPIRE Server to become ready by running the following commands:
+

> [source,terminal,'subs="+quotes,verbatim"']

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes,verbatim"]
```

----

> $ until oc get statefulset/spire-server -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

> $ until oc get statefulset/spire-server -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ kubectl rollout status statefulset/spire-server -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
----

.. Create the `SpireAgent` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireAgent
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  socketPath: "/run/spire/agent-sockets"
  logLevel: "info"
  logFormat: "text"
  nodeAttestor:
    k8sPSATEnabled: "true"
  workloadAttestors:
    k8sEnabled: "true"
    workloadAttestorsVerification:
      type: "auto"
      hostCertBasePath: "/etc/kubernetes"
      hostCertFileName: "kubelet-ca.crt"
    disableContainerSelectors: "false"
    useNewContainerLocator: "true"
EOF
----

.. Wait for the SPIRE Agent to become ready by running the following commands:
+

> [source,terminal,'subs="+quotes,verbatim"']

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes,verbatim"]
```

----

> $ until oc get daemonset/spire-agent -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ kubectl rollout status daemonset/spire-agent -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
----

.. Deploy the `SpiffeCSIDriver` CR:
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpiffeCSIDriver
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  agentSocketPath: '/run/spire/agent-sockets'
  pluginName: "csi.spiffe.io"
EOF
----

.. Wait for the SPIFFE CSI Driver to become ready by running the following commands:
+

> [source,terminal,'subs="+quotes,verbatim"']

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes,verbatim"]
```

----

> $ until oc get daemonset/spire-spiffe-csi-driver -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ kubectl rollout status daemonset/spire-spiffe-csi-driver -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
----

.. Deploy the `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` CR:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ export OIDC_DISCOVERY_CONFIG_MAP=spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider
----
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  logLevel: "info"
  logFormat: "text"
  csiDriverName: "csi.spiffe.io"
  jwtIssuer: $JWT_ISSUER
  replicaCount: 1
  managedRoute: "true"
EOF
----

.. Wait for the OIDC Discovery Provider to be created by running the following commands:
+

> [source,terminal,'subs="+quotes,verbatim"']

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes,verbatim"]
```

----

> $ until oc get deployment spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
----

.Verification

. Verify that {zero-trust-full} is installed:

.. Deploy the client workload and try to fetch a workload SVID:
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: ztwim-client
  namespace: default
  labels:
    app: ztwim-client
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: ztwim-client
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: ztwim-client
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: client
          image: ghcr.io/spiffe/spire-agent:1.5.1
          command: ["/opt/spire/bin/spire-agent"]
          args: [ "api", "watch",  "-socketPath", "/run/spire/sockets/spire-agent.sock" ]
          volumeMounts:
            - mountPath: /run/spire/sockets
              name: spiffe-workload-api
              readOnly: true
      volumes:
      - name: spiffe-workload-api
        csi:
          driver: csi.spiffe.io
          readOnly: true
EOF
----

.. Wait for the client deployment to become ready by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ until oc get deployment ztwim-client -n default &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

Author: Done

> [source,terminal,'subs="+quotes,verbatim"']

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes,verbatim"]
```

        - name: client
          image: ghcr.io/spiffe/spire-agent:1.5.1
          command: ["/opt/spire/bin/spire-agent"]
          args: [ "api", "watch",  "-socketPath", "/run/spire/sockets/spire-agent.sock" ]
          volumeMounts:
            - mountPath: /run/spire/sockets
              name: spiffe-workload-api
              readOnly: true
      volumes:
      - name: spiffe-workload-api
        csi:
          driver: csi.spiffe.io
          readOnly: true
EOF
----

.. Wait for the client deployment to become ready by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ until oc get deployment ztwim-client -n default &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/ztwim-client -n default --timeout=300s
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sleep 5
----

. Verify that the x509 SVID is available by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec -it \
  "$(oc get \
      pods -o=jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}' \
      -l app=ztwim-client \
      -n default \
   )" -n default -- \
  /opt/spire/bin/spire-agent \
    api fetch -socketPath /run/spire/sockets/spire-agent.sock
----
+

> You should receive an SVID like the example below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The expected output is an SVID like the following example:
```
no positional statements (accessibility)

Author: Done

+
[source,text]
----
Received 1 svid after 29.636075ms

SPIFFE ID:		spiffe://ocp.one/ns/default/sa/default
SVID Valid After:	 2025-10-21 14:04:03 +0000 UTC
SVID Valid Until:	 2025-10-21 15:04:13 +0000 UTC
CA #1 Valid After:	2025-10-21 07:38:03 +0000 UTC
CA #1 Valid Until:	2025-10-22 07:38:13 +0000 UTC
----

. Verify that the JSON Web Token (JWT) SVID is available by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc exec -it \
  "$(oc get \
      pods -o=jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}' \
      -l app=ztwim-client \
      -n default \
   )" -n default -- \
  /opt/spire/bin/spire-agent \
    api fetch jwt -audience=sample-aud -socketPath /run/spire/sockets/spire-agent.sock
----
+

> You should receive a JWT SVID as shown in the example below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The expected output is a JWT SVID like the one in the following example:
```

Author: Done

+
[source,text]
----
token(spiffe://ocp.one/ns/default/sa/default):
	eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6Ij....IsIm
bundle(spiffe://ocp.one):
	{
    "keys": [
        {
            "kty": "RSA",
            "kid": "6k9PfhrAdfajT6jvLvR6bdomFvQxMeGf",
            "n": "wEYTV0ri4OOcdgEVgzN0...KhUEGf0NKxnuaeGQ",
            "e": "AQAB"
        }
    ]
}
----

. Remove the client workload by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete deployment ztwim-client -n default
----

> 

Reviewer 2: remove all but one of the extra line spaces here; these _could_ trip conversion if the following file has any issues

Author: Done
